Why Thify?
==========

**Think for yourself - a call to (communicative) action** [^communicativeaction]

There appears to be ample empirical evidence that the human mind loves two things: causality and coherence. We can't help but look for causal links and explanations, even if the subject matter is too complex for simple explanations ("the Dow tanked today because investors felt...").  And in trying to pick out those causal links our mind looks for the most coherent story it can construct from the available data points.  Less is clearly more in this case, as additional information and the contradictions it introduces only obfuscate the coherent story that stood out so clearly with only a few data points in sight. This mental reflex is strong: it takes an extra effort to "unbelieve" a coherent narrative that was based on a few data points when new contradictory evidence presents itself. [^kahnemann]

The way we consume news today very neatly reinforces that mental model. Under a "if you liked this you will also enjoy this" policy the Web's recommendation engines keep feeding us content that smoothly fit with our prior believes - coherence everywhere. Conveniently, the rest of the news media has also segmented itself nicely such that the folks on the right can watch FoxNews while the left has MSNBC or John Stewart running. It's candy for our minds - no (truly) contradictory information, limited complexity, all helping to feed that coherent causal narrative on everything from healthcare to foreign policy.

Along the way it seems we have lost the ability to have a meaningful debate with someone who doesn't share our newsfeed. The "peculiarly unforced force of the better argument" [^zwangloserzwang] is regrettably absent from today's public debate (to the extent that there is any such debate).  There also seems to have emerged some unwritten rule that our views on a whole range of issues have to align along a single dimension. If you consider yourself "conservative" by some standard you can't possibly be concerned about climate change. If, by some measure, you see yourself standing "on the left" it would be heresy to question, say, the benefit of legally mandated minimum wages. Anything but these one-dimensional views wouldn't align themselves along the modern media axis and therefore cannot be. It seems we have outsourced a big portion of our thinking to some "opinion machine".

Why is this a problem? The dual desire for causality and coherence probably worked very well for our ancestors. If it looks like a lion and sounds like a lion you're probably better of on average by hoofing it rather than waiting for additional data to come in. In fact, in many cases it still works today. In situations where we control many of the variables, quick and decisive action based on a few simple principles will often be preferable to prolonged deliberation. In personal and professional situations the ability to quickly make a decision and to deal with its consequences is often more valuable than agonizing over the theoretically "right" decision.

However this logic starts to fail in situations where we have little or no control of the forces at play. When trying to reform the healthcare system or to decide whether to invade another country we can't escape the fact that the world is complex and simple narratives have little or no correlation to reality.  In a famous 2005 experiment, Philip Tetlock ....

Thify is a very small attempt to help us be more like foxes rather than hedgehogs on issues where the difference counts. By default our mind is lazy and will be content with the first coherent narrative it finds or can construct.  Thify tries to make it a little easier for us not to stop there. Go on and find what the other side(s) of the issue are and pick and choose - don't let others do your thinking. And once we have looked at an issue this way we hopefully can have a constructive debate again. To quote Habermas once more: "Democracy depends on the belief of the people that there is some scope left for collectively shaping a challenging future." [^leadershipleitkultur]


[^communicativeaction]: Wikipedia: ["Communicative Action"](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Communicative_action)

[^kahnemann]: see [Daniel Kahnemann](http://www.princeton.edu/~kahneman/), ["Thinking, Fast and Slow"](https://archive.org/details/pdfy-XdUn_Gp9fEO3IuY6) (reviewed [here](http://scholar.harvard.edu/files/shleifer/files/kahneman_review_jel_final.pdf))

[^zwangloserzwang]: [Juergen Habermas](http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/habermas/)' German phrase "der eigentuemlich zwanglose Zwang des besseren Arguments" appears as "the peculiarly unforced force of the better argument" in the English translations of his works. That translation however misses some of the levity of the German original. An alternative English equivalent might be "the peculiarly relaxed inevitability of the better argument").

[^leadershipleitkultur]: "[Leadership and Leitkultur](http://www.nytimes.com/2010/10/29/opinion/29Habermas.html?pagewanted=all)", New York Times, October 28, 2010
